doc: module: Conditional exports docs for writing dual packages (#30051)
nodejs/node: doc/api/esm.md

`"exports": {}` to indicate the package does not intend for submodules to be
exposed.

Any invalid exports entries will be ignored. This includes exports not
starting with `"./"` or a missing trailing `"/"` for directory exports.

> Array fallback support is provided for exports, similarly to import maps

Reviewer: confirming: is this still true for import maps?

Reviewer 2: Fallbacks are still considered a possible future feature of import maps, but yes perhaps we should reword this.

> Array fallback support is provided for exports, similarly to import maps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Array fallbacks are supported for exports, as has been proposed for import maps
```

  "exports": {
    "./feature": {
      "browser": "./feature-browser.js",
      "default": "./feature-default.js"
    }
  }
}
```

When an exports target condition object is provided like the above, the first
matching key in the object that is supported by the current environment will
be resolved.

When resolving the `"."` export, if no matching target is found, the `"main"`
will be used as the final fallback.

The conditions supported in Node.js are matched in the following order:

1. `"require"` - matched when the package is loaded via `require()`.
  This is currently only supported behind the `--experimental-require-target`
  flag.
2. `"node"` - matched for any Node.js environment. Can be a CommonJS or ES
   module file.
3. `"default"` - the generic fallback that will always match if no other
   more specific condition is matched first. Can be a CommonJS or ES module
   file.

Using the `"require"` condition it is possible to define a package that will
have a different exported value for CommonJS and ES modules, which can be a
hazard in that it can result in having two separate instances of the same
package in use in an application, which can cause a number of bugs.

> Other conditions such as `"browser"`, `"electron"`, `"deno"`, `"react-native"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other conditions such as `"browser"`, `"electron"`, `"deno"`, `"react-native"`,
```

`"exports": {}` to indicate the package does not intend for submodules to be
exposed.

Any invalid exports entries will be ignored. This includes exports not
starting with `"./"` or a missing trailing `"/"` for directory exports.

Array fallback support is provided for exports, similarly to import maps
in order to be forward-compatible with fallback workflows in future:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
{
  "exports": {
    "./submodule": ["not:valid", "./submodule.js"]
  }
}
```

> Since `"not:valid"` is not a supported target, `"./submodule.js"` is used

Author: This isn't part of this PR.

Other conditions such as `"browser"`, `"electron"`, `"deno"`, `"react-native"`
etc. could be defined in other runtimes or tools.

### Dual CommonJS/ES Module Packages

Prior to the introduction of support for ES modules in Node.js, it was a common
pattern for package authors to include both CommonJS and ES module JavaScript
sources in their package, with `package.json` `"main"` specifying the CommonJS
entry point and `package.json` `"module"` specifying the ES module entry point.
This enabled Node.js to run the CommonJS entry point while build tools such as
bundlers used the ES module entry point, since Node.js ignored (and still
ignores) the top-level `"module"` field.

Node.js can now run ES module entry points, and using [conditional exports][] it
is possible to define separate package entry points for CommonJS and ES module
consumers. Unlike in the scenario where `"module"` is only used by bundlers, or
ES module files are transpiled into CommonJS on the fly before evaluation by
Node.js, the files referenced by the ES module entry point are evaluated as ES
modules.

#### Divergent Specifier Hazard

When one application is using both CommonJS and ES module code provided by one

> package, there is a risk of certain bugs that only occur under these conditions.

Reviewer 3: I will think about this and try to give a proper response soon.

I also welcome input from others, wording is not exactly my strength.

> package, there is a risk of certain bugs that only occur under these conditions.

Reviewer 3: > When one application is using both CommonJS and ES module code provided by one package, there is an added risk of bugs caused by loading multiple instances of singletons.

This is the best I can come up with right now.  Maybe someone can think of coherent way for this place to also directly mention duplicated installation due to conflicting versions but just calling it an "added risk" rather than the sole cause will make me happy enough.

modules are supported, `import 'pkg'` references `pkg.mjs`.

The potential for bugs comes from the fact that the `pkg` created by `const pkg
= require('pkg')` is not the same as the `pkg` created by `import pkg from
'pkg'`. This is the “divergent specifier hazard,” where one specifer (`'pkg'`)
resolves to separate files (`pkg.cjs` and `pkg.mjs`) in separate module systems,
yet both versions might get loaded within an application because Node.js
supports intermixing CommonJS and ES modules.

An `instanceof` comparison of the two returns `false`, and properties added to
one (like `pkg.foo = 3`) are not present on the other. This differs from how
`import` and `require` statements work in all-CommonJS or all-ES module
environments, respectively, and therefore is surprising to users. It also
differs from the behavior users are familiar with when using transpilation via
tools like [Babel][] or [`esm`][].

Even if the user consistently uses either `require` or `import` to refer to
`pkg`, if any dependencies of the application use the other method the hazard is
still present.

#### Writing Dual Packages While Avoiding or Minimizing Hazards

> First, the hazard described in the previous section only occurs when a package

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, the hazard described in the previous section occurs when a package
```

1. The package provides named exports, e.g. `import { name } from 'pkg'` rather
   than `import pkg from 'pkg'; pkg.name`.
1. The package is potentially usable in other ES module environments such as
   browsers.
1. The hazards described in the previous section are avoided or minimized.

##### Approach #1: Use an ES Module Wrapper

Write the package in CommonJS or transpile ES module sources into CommonJS, and
create an ES module wrapper file that defines the named exports. Using
conditional exports, the ES module wrapper is used for `import` and the CommonJS
entry point for `require`.

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
// ./node_modules/pkg/package.json
{
  "type": "module",
  "main": "./index.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": {
      "module": "./wrapper.mjs",
      "default": "./index.cjs"
    }
  }
}
```

```js
// ./node_modules/pkg/index.cjs
exports.name = 'value';
```

```js
// ./node_modules/pkg/wrapper.mjs
import cjsModule from './index.cjs';
export const name = cjsModule.name;
```

In this example, the `name` from `import { name } from 'pkg'` is the same
singleton as the `name` from `const { name } = require('pkg')`. Therefore

> `instanceof` returns `true` when comparing the two `name`s and the divergent

Reviewer 3: The `name` is a string so `instanceof` would throw `TypeError: Right-hand side of 'instanceof' is not an object`.  Probably should have `pkg` export a class.  Should `===` be mentioned here as well?

Author: Yes. What’s the correct way to phrase it? Do we want to mention both `===` and `instanceof` or just `===`?

Reviewer 3: Maybe just `===` for this section (wrapper method)?  I think that most people would understand that if `esm.MyClass === cjs.MyClass` then `instanceof` automatically matches.

> In this example, the `Foo` from `import { Foo } from 'pkg'` is the same singleton as the `Foo` from `const { Foo } = require('pkg')`.  Therefore `===` returns `true` when comparing the two `Foo`'s and the divergent specifier hazard is avoided.

This is my idea assuming the module is changed to `exports.Foo = class {}` but as I said writing is not my strength.  Not sure if using a class is best here or if simply using an object or array would be enough.

Aside from writing a stateless package (if JavaScript’s `Math` were a package,
for example, it would be stateless as all of its methods are static), there are
three ways to isolate state so that it’s shared between the potentially loaded
CommonJS and ES module instances of the package:

1. If possible, contain all state within an instantiated object. JavaScript’s
   `Date`, for example, needs to be instantiated to contain state; if it were a
   package, it would be used like this:

    ```js
    import date from 'date';
    const someDate = new date();
    // someDate contains state; date does not
    ```

   The `new` keyword isn’t required; a package’s function can return a new
   object, or modify a passed-in object, to keep the state external to the
   package.

1. Isolate the state in one or more CommonJS files that are shared between the
   CommonJS and ES module versions of the package. For example, if the CommonJS
   and ES module entry points are `index.cjs` and `index.mjs`, respectively:

    ```js
    // ./node_modules/pkg/index.cjs
    const state = require('./state.cjs');
    module.exports.state = state;
    ```

    ```js
    // ./node_modules/pkg/index.mjs

>     export * as state from './state.cjs';

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    import state from './state.cjs';
    export {state};
```

    ```

   Even if `pkg` is used via both `require` and `import` in an application (for
   example, via `import` in application code and via `require` by a dependency)
   each reference of `pkg` will contain the same state; and modifying that
   state from either module system will apply to both.

   A package utilizing this pattern would not be usable unmodified in browsers
   or in other environments that lack support for CommonJS.

1. Write a package where state is stored globally. This is similar to the
   previous approach, but instead of isolating state within a shared CommonJS
   file it is attached to the global object, e.g.

>    `globalThis[Symbol.for('pkg@1.2.3')]`.

Reviewer 3: Other sections have more details, should an example of this be provided, or maybe just recommend use of `Object.defineProperty` to which defaults to `enumerable: false`?

```js
const singletonSymbol = Symbol.for('pkg@1.2.3');
if (!(singletonSymbol in globalThis)) {
  Object.defineProperty(globalThis, singletonSymbol, {value: {}});
}

const singletonData = globalThis[singletonSymbol];
```

Also the disadvantage of polluting `globalThis` brings the advantage of providing a shared singleton even if node_modules has duplication.

Author: Sure, though the overall section was starting to feel long. Is the example in your comment what you’d suggest as the recommended best practice?

Reviewer 3: My example code is basically what I would use to setup a `singletonData` object which would be shared among all copies of the code.

Maybe lets give a bit of time to see if others have input on this before making a change.

   This has the disadvantage of polluting the global namespace, but it is
   compatible with non-CommonJS environments such as browsers.

For packages using this approach, regardless of which state management pattern
is chosen, an `instanceof` comparison would return `false` when comparing the
CommonJS and ES module versions of the package or of objects instantiated from
each version. End users of such packages need to be aware of this and avoid
comparing identity in mixed-module system environments, or check against both
versions:

```js

> import { createRequire } from 'module';

Author: I considered this. I agree it’s a better solution, but doesn’t this require the original package author to embed this secret symbol, so that it could be found by dependents hoping to compare? Whereas doing two `instanceof`s doesn’t require any cooperation on the part of the original package.

Or could the dependent doing the comparison, whether another package or the end user, attach the symbol to the two singletons? Though doing so would bring us back to needing `createRequire`, in order to access the CommonJS version.

> import { createRequire } from 'module';

Reviewer 3: If the original author is choosing to publish dual mode then they should embed the symbol and provide an `instanceOfX` method and document that users should call that method instead of using `instanceof` syntax.

> import { createRequire } from 'module';

Author: > If the original author is choosing to publish dual mode then they should embed the symbol

Sure, we should suggest that, but ideally we’d have a solution that doesn’t require effort on both sides (author and consumer).

> import { createRequire } from 'module';

Reviewer 3: I was going to say it's too bad JavaScript doesn't allow overloading `instanceof`, then I learned that it can!  This is accomplished with [Symbol.hasInstance](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol/hasInstance).  I've created a simple but well tested module which makes it very easily deal with `instanceof` in node.js 6.5.0+ and modern browsers.  See https://github.com/cfware/instanceof-unifier#readme for example of fixing `instanceof` for a dual mode transpiled module, so all effort is removed from the consumer.

> import { createRequire } from 'module';

Author: That’s very clever! I’ll have to give some thought as to how to reduce that into a minimal example for inclusion in the docs. I feel like the docs probably can’t link to random personal GitHub example repos.

So that’s a solution where action is required only on the package author’s side; there a different solution where action is required only on the consumer’s side? Is that consumer’s side solution the example I already have in the docs?

I agree the burden should be on the author, so maybe that’s the only example we include, unless there’s value in both?

> import { createRequire } from 'module';

Reviewer 3: > That’s very clever! I’ll have to give some thought as to how to reduce that into a minimal example for inclusion in the docs. I feel like the docs probably can’t link to random personal GitHub example repos.

Understandable, I'm not aware of any examples of node.js documentation linking to any user-space modules.  For what it's worth the intent is not to be an example repo, it's published to npm.

> So that’s a solution where action is required only on the package author’s side; there a different solution where action is required only on the consumer’s side? Is that consumer’s side solution the example I already have in the docs?
> 
> I agree the burden should be on the author, so maybe that’s the only example we include, unless there’s value in both?

This document will set expectations for how authors should publish dual mode modules, so my vote is against suggesting alternatives where the author could shift the burden to consumers.

would be usable by any version of Node.js, since `import` can refer to CommonJS
files; but it would not provide any of the advantages of using ES module syntax.

A package could also switch from CommonJS to ES module syntax in a breaking
change version bump. This has the obvious disadvantage that the newest version
of the package would only be usable in ES module-supporting versions of Node.js.

Every pattern has tradeoffs, but there are two broad approaches that satisfy the
following conditions:

1. The package is usable via both `require` and `import`.
1. The package is usable in both current Node.js and older versions of Node.js
   that lack support for ES modules.
1. The package main entry point, e.g. `'pkg'` can be used by both `require` to
   resolve to a CommonJS file and by `import` to resolve to an ES module file.
   (And likewise for exported paths, e.g. `'pkg/feature'`.)
1. The package provides named exports, e.g. `import { name } from 'pkg'` rather
   than `import pkg from 'pkg'; pkg.name`.
1. The package is potentially usable in other ES module environments such as
   browsers.
1. The hazards described in the previous section are avoided or minimized.

> ##### Approach #1: Use an ES Module Wrapper

Reviewer 2: Another way to think about this is that we have a spectrum from a "wrapper" to entirely separate CJS and ESM sources. And that state isolation lies on that spectrum itself. Users can thus decide where they want their approach to fall. Not sure where that is useful to fit in, but it might help shift the thinking from just "use approach A or approach B".

  to refactor it into ES module syntax, but wishes to provide named exports for
  ES module consumers.
* The package has other packages that depend on it, and the end user might
  install both this package and those other packages. For example a `utilities`
  package is used directly in an application, and a `utilities-plus` package
  adds a few more functions to `utilities`. Because the wrapper exports
  underlying CommonJS files, it doesn’t matter if `utilities-plus` is written in
  CommonJS or ES module syntax; it will work either way.
* The package stores internal state, and the package author would prefer not to
  refactor the package to isolate its state management. See the next section.

A variant of this approach would add an export, e.g. `"./module"`, to point to
an all-ES module-syntax version the package. This could be used via `import
'pkg/module'` by users who are certain that the CommonJS version will not be
loaded anywhere in the application, such as by dependencies; or if the CommonJS
version can be loaded but doesn’t affect the ES module version (for example,
because the package is stateless).

> ##### Approach #2: Isolate State

Reviewer 2: I think it's important to still mention that even with state isolated there is the remaining tradeoff cost of executing more code.

    export state from './state.cjs';
    ```

   Even if `pkg` is used via both `require` and `import` in an application (for
   example, via `import` in application code and via `require` by a dependency)
   each reference of `pkg` will contain the same state; and modifying that
   state from either module system will apply to both.

   A package utilizing this pattern would not be usable unmodified in browsers
   or in other environments that lack support for CommonJS.

1. Write a package where state is stored globally. This is similar to the
   previous approach, but instead of isolating state within a shared CommonJS
   file it is attached to the global object, e.g.
   `globalThis[Symbol.for('pkg@1.2.3:state')]`.

    ```js
    const stateSymbol = Symbol.for('pkg@1.2.3:state');
    if (!(stateSymbol in globalThis)) {
      Object.defineProperty(globalThis, stateSymbol, {value: {}});
    }
    const state = globalThis[singletonSymbol];
    ```

   This has the disadvantage of polluting the global namespace, but it is
   compatible with non-CommonJS environments such as browsers. It also shares
   state across multiple loaded numbered versions of the same package, e.g.

>    1.0.0 and 2.0.0, not just CommonJS vs ES module versions.

Reviewer 2: I would really prefer if we could avoid encouraging global state as a pattern. Can we remove this whole item entirely please?

Author: I’m not sure we should remove it. I think there will be some packages that really need to keep internal state, and should be shared between versions; and also want to be browser-compatible. This is the only solution that satisfies those criteria. The only other “shared state” solution, isolating the state in a CommonJS file, isn’t browser-compatible without build tools.

Reviewer 2: The expectation for browser compatibility is that the `"browser"` field can point to a module that will work in the browser. There is no need for state sharing between the browser and Node.js sources.

Author: Yes but if I want to write a package that shares state between the two Node builds, and also has state for a browser build; and I don’t want to write separate logic for the browser version of state management; I think this is the only way.

Reviewer 2: You can write your stateful code as ES modules, transpiling to CommonJS from Babel. The stateful code can then use the ES module sources in the browser and the CommonJS sources in Node. That handles it perfectly fine.

Author: > The stateful code can then use the ES module sources in the browser and the CommonJS sources in Node.

The issue is that authors want Node to load the ESM sources in versions of Node that support them. So we need not only ESM sources that work unmodified in both Node and browsers; but _also_ that in Node share state with concurrently loaded CommonJS sources.

I also just don’t think that attaching an object to `globalThis` is so terrible. The docs already call this out as a downside, but it’s one that users are familiar with. They understand the risks.

Reviewer 4: > I also just don’t think that attaching an object to globalThis is so terrible

Man, I _do_ love `window.jQuery`. That has absolutely never caused problems in any shipping webapps.

Reviewer 2: Consider the following app:

```
- src/state/state-management-universal.cjs
- src/entry-node.cjs
- browser/entry-browser.mjs
```

`browser/entry-browser.mjs` can load from `../src/state/...` to load stateful modules from their ES sources, while CJS load will load state relatively and thus get the transpiled state module sources.

The "browser" folder doesn't need transpilation. The `src` folder is compiled into `lib` to contain the same sources as `src` but as CommonJS.

We then set the package.json to provide:

```json
{
  "main": "./lib/entry-node.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": {
      "browser": "./browser/entry-browser.mjs",
      "require": "./lib/entry-node.cjs",
      "default": "./src/entry-node.mjs"
    }
  }
}
```

The exact details here are very case specific, but the above is a generic approach nonetheless. I'm not sure why it is up to Node.js documentation to solve and document this case though.

Reviewer 2: I do think we should remove this section entirely, because this is objectively terrible, and as provided above there are alternatives that aren't terrible. I would go so far as blocking on this.

For packages publishing separate CommonJS and ES module versions without a
wrapper, regardless of which state management pattern is chosen, an `instanceof`
comparison would return `false` when comparing the CommonJS and ES module

> versions of the package or of objects instantiated from each version. End users

Reviewer 2: It's worth noting though that if the ES module wrapper exports a default, that `default` export could match the CJS module, just the same as importing CJS normally from ESM.

Author: Do you mind phrasing that in a way that I can copy/paste into the docs? I’m not sure I understand it well enough to write it.

Array fallback support is provided for exports, similarly to import maps
in order to be forward-compatible with fallback workflows in future:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
{
  "exports": {
    "./submodule": ["not:valid", "./submodule.js"]
  }
}
```

Since `"not:valid"` is not a supported target, `"./submodule.js"` is used
instead as the fallback, as if it were the only target.

Defining a `"."` export will define the main entry point for the package,
and will always take precedence over the `"main"` field in the `package.json`.

This allows defining a different entry point for Node.js versions that support
ECMAScript modules and versions that don't, for example:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
{
  "main": "./main-legacy.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./main-modern.cjs"
  }
}
```

#### Conditional Exports

Conditional exports provide a way to map to different paths depending on
certain conditions. They are supported for both CommonJS and ES module imports.

For example, a package that wants to provide different ES module exports for
Node.js and the browser can be written:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
// ./node_modules/pkg/package.json
{

>   "type": "module",

Reviewer: i think it's better to omit "type" entirely here, and use `mjs` and `cjs`, so that the package type is irrelevant.

Author: I'd prefer to include it, as we're encouraging its inclusion in all packages regardless of necessity.

Reviewer: then let's use the default, instead of "module", since there's nothing about this example that needs type module.

Reviewer 2: I think it's important that the examples include the practical details like this.

   each reference of `pkg` will contain the same state; and modifying that
   state from either module system will apply to both.

   A package utilizing this pattern would not be usable unmodified in browsers
   or in other environments that lack support for CommonJS.

1. Write a package where state is stored globally. This is similar to the
   previous approach, but instead of isolating state within a shared CommonJS
   file it is attached to the global object, e.g.
   `globalThis[Symbol.for('pkg@1.2.3:state')]`.

    ```js
    const stateSymbol = Symbol.for('pkg@1.2.3:state');
    if (!(stateSymbol in globalThis)) {
      Object.defineProperty(globalThis, stateSymbol, {value: {}});
    }
    const state = globalThis[singletonSymbol];
    ```

   This has the disadvantage of polluting the global namespace, but it is
   compatible with non-CommonJS environments such as browsers. It also shares
   state across multiple loaded numbered versions of the same package, e.g.
   1.0.0 and 2.0.0, not just CommonJS vs ES module versions.

For packages publishing separate CommonJS and ES module versions without a

> wrapper, in order for an `instanceof` comparison of the CommonJS and ES module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wrapper, in order for an `===` comparison of the CommonJS and ES module
```
`instanceof` only applies to the potentially minority case of using classes; identity is the real issue here (which `instanceof` does invoke)

Author: This example specifically fixes `instanceof`.

versions of the package or of objects instantiated from each version to return
`true`, [`Symbol.hasInstance`][] needs to be used to customize the behavior of

> `instanceof` for the exported object:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`instanceof` for the exported class:
```

```js
const matcher = 'pkg@1.2.3:mainExport'; // Must be unique per package and export

> Object.defineProperties(exportedClassOrObject, {

Reviewer 3: The MDN documentation for [Symbol.hasInstance](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol/hasInstance) says to create `static [Symbol.hasInstance](instance)` so I this needs to be `exportedClass`.  Attaching to an instance does not work.

Author: So what about packages that aren’t classes?

Reviewer 3: To clarify `function Pkg() {}` and `class Pkg() {}` are equal for this purpose, both are classes.  If you're asking something else then `instanceof` does not apply, the right hand side must be a class constructor.

  [matcher]: {
    get() {
      return true;
    }
  },
  [Symbol.hasInstance]: {
    value(instance) {
      if (this === exportedClassOrObject) {
        return instance.constructor[matcher] === true;
      } else {

>         return Object[Symbol.hasInstance].call(this, instance);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        return instance instanceof this;
```
?

Reviewer 3: This would cause `RangeError: Maximum call stack size exceeded` when you run on a child class.  Example:

```js
class Pkg {}
// use sample code to attach [Symbol.hasInstance] to Pkg
class Child extends Pkg {}
assert((new Child()) instanceof Child);
```

Specifically this example causes `Pkg[Symbol.hasInstance]` to be called with `this === Child`.  This scenario is covered by my tests at https://github.com/cfware/instanceof-unifier.

Author: > This would cause `RangeError: Maximum call stack size exceeded`

Are you referring to what’s in the PR or what @ljharb proposed? Can you please tell me what this example should say?

Reviewer 3: Sorry I'm referring to what @ljharb suggested.  The only suggestion I have for this example code is to use `exportedClass` instead of `exportedClassOrObject`.
